---
title: xmonad and xmonad-contrib 0.17.1 are available
image: images/xmonad-0.17.1.png
---

New versions of xmonad and xmonad-contrib have been released.  Check out
our [download page]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link download.md %}) for
instructions on where to get them.

About 10 months after the big release of 0.17.0, we—as promised—picked
up the pace a bit and are back with a new minor version; don't let that
fool you though, this one still packs a punch!  Plus, we now sport a
brand-new [logo], courtesy of [Hans Heintze].

As this is a minor release, we tried to keep the breaking changes to a
minimum (xmonad core does not have a single one!)  However, some were
unavoidable for `xmonad-contrib`, so be sure to at least glance at the
[release notes](#xmonad-contrib-0.17.1)!

For help getting started—or more info—see [our website][xmonad.org] and
[talk to us][community]!  If you like what we do, you can support us on
[Open Collective] or via [GitHub Sponsors].  Thanks!

[GitHub Sponsors]: https://github.com/sponsors/xmonad
[Hans Heintze]: https://github.com/literallyunplayable
[Open Collective]: https://opencollective.com/xmonad
[community]: https://xmonad.org/community.html
[logo]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% link images/logo.svg %}
[xmonad.org]: https://xmonad.org/

### Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}

  + TOC
  {:toc}

# xmonad 0.17.1

This release includes 32 non-merge commits by 6 contributors!  For a
full summary of all the changes, see [xmonad's CHANGES.md] file.

[xmonad's CHANGES.md]: https://github.com/xmonad/xmonad/blob/v0.17.1/CHANGES.md

## Enhancements

  + Added custom cursor shapes for resizing and moving windows.

## Bug Fixes

  + Change the main loop to try to avoid [GHC bug 21708] on systems
    running GHC 9.2 up to version 9.2.3.  The issue has been fixed in
    [GHC 9.2.4] and all later releases.

  + Fixed border color of windows with alpha channel.  Now all windows
    have the same opaque border color.

[GHC bug 21708]: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/21708
[GHC 9.2.4]: https://discourse.haskell.org/t/ghc-9-2-4-released/4851

# xmonad-contrib 0.17.1

This release includes 212 non-merge commits by 32 contributors!  For a
full summary of all the changes, see [xmonad-contrib's CHANGES.md] file.

[xmonad-contrib's CHANGES.md]: https://github.com/xmonad/xmonad-contrib/blob/v0.17.1/CHANGES.md

## Breaking Changes

  + `XMonad.Config.{Arossato,Dmwit,Droundy,Monad,Prime,Saegesser,Sjanssen}`:
    deprecated all of these modules.  The user-specific configuration
    modules may still be found [on the website].

 + `XMonad.Util.NamedScratchpad`: scratchpads are now only based on the
    argument given to `namedScratchpadManageHook`; all other scratchpad
    arguments are, while still present, ignored.  Users passing all of
    their scratchpads to functions like `namedScratchpadAction` (as is
    shown in the module's documentation) should _not_ notice any
    difference in behaviour.

  + `XMonad.Util.DynamicScratchpads`: deprecated the module; use the new
    dynamic scratchpad functionality of `XMonad.Util.NamedScratchpad`
    instead.

  + `XMonad.Hooks.UrgencyHook`: deprecated `urgencyConfig`; use `def`
    from the new `Default` instance of `UrgencyConfig` instead.

[on the website]: https://xmonad.org/configurations.html

## New Modules

  + `XMonad.Hooks.Modal`: a module implementing modal keybindings for
    XMonad.

  + `XMonad.Layout.SideBorderDecoration`: this module allows for having
    a configurable border position around windows; i.e., it can move the
    border to either cardinal direction.

  + `XMonad.Actions.PerLayoutKeys`: a new module for customising
    keybindings on a per-layout basis.

  + `XMonad.Actions.RepeatAction`: a module for adding a keybinding to
    repeat the last action, similar to Vim's `.` or Emacs's `dot-mode`.

## Bug Fixes and Minor Changes

  + `XMonad.Prompt` and `XMonad.Actions.TreeSelect`: added xft-based
    font fallback support.  This may be used by appending other fonts to
    the given string: `xft:iosevka-11,FontAwesome-9`.  Note that this
    requires `xmonad-contrib` to be compiled with `X11-xft` version
    0.3.4 or higher.

  + `XMonad.Util.Run`: added an EDSL—particularly geared towards
    programs like terminals or Emacs—to spawn processes from XMonad in a
    compositional way.

  + `XMonad.Util.Hacks`: added `trayerPaddingXmobarEventHook` (plus
    generic variants for other trays/panels) to communicate trayer
    resize events to xmobar so that padding space may be reserved on
    xmobar for the tray.  Requires `xmobar` version 0.40 or higher.

  + `XMonad.Prompt.OrgMode`: added the ability to specify alphabetic
    (`#A`, `#B`, and `#C`) [priorities] at the end of the input note.

  + `XMonad.Actions.Submap`: added `visualSubmap` to visualise the
    available keys and their actions when inside a submap.

  + `XMonad.Util.NamedScratchpad`: added support for dynamic scratchpads
    in the form of `dynamicNSPAction` and `toggleDynamicNSP`.

  + `XMonad.Hooks.WindowSwallowing`: fixed windows getting lost when
    used in conjunction with `smartBorders` and a single window.

[priorities]: https://orgmode.org/manual/Priorities.html
