---
title: xmonad 0.18.0 is available
image: images/logo-wordmark.png
---

# xmonad and xmonad-contrib 0.18.0 are available

New versions of xmonad and xmonad-contrib have been released.
Check out our
[download page]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link download.md %})
for instructions on where to get them.
As this is a major release containing a few breaking changes inside of `xmonad-contrib`,
so be sure to check out the [release notes](#xmonad-contrib-0180)!
For help getting started—or more info—see [our website][xmonad.org] and [talk to us][community]!
If you like what we do, you can support us on [Open Collective] or via [GitHub Sponsors].
Thanks!

[GitHub Sponsors]: https://github.com/sponsors/xmonad
[Open Collective]: https://opencollective.com/xmonad
[community]: https://xmonad.org/community.html
[xmonad.org]: https://xmonad.org/

### Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}

  + TOC
  {:toc}

## xmonad 0.18.0

This release includes 85 non-merge commits by 15 contributors!
For a full summary of all the changes, see [xmonad's CHANGES.md] file.

[xmonad's CHANGES.md]: https://github.com/xmonad/xmonad/blob/v0.18.0/CHANGES.md

### Breaking Changes

* Dropped support for GHC 8.4.

### Selected Features and Improvements

* `XMonad.Operations.floatLocation` now applies size hints. This means windows
  will snap to these hints as soon as they're floated (mouse move, keybinding).
  Previously that only happened on mouse resize.

* Recompilation now detects `flake.nix` and `default.nix` (can be a
  symlink) and switches to using `nix build` as appropriate.

* Added `unGrab` to `XMonad.Operations`; this releases XMonad's passive
  keyboard grab, so other applications (like `scrot`) can do their
  thing.

* Duplicated floats (e.g. from X.A.CopyToAll) no longer escape to inactive
  screens.

## xmonad-contrib 0.18.0

This release includes 195 non-merge commits by 25 contributors!
For a full summary of all the changes, see [xmonad-contrib's CHANGES.md] file.

[xmonad-contrib's CHANGES.md]: https://github.com/xmonad/xmonad-contrib/blob/v0.18.0/CHANGES.md

### Major Breaking Changes

  * Dropped support for GHC 8.4.

  * Deprecated `XMonad.Layout.Cross` due to bitrot; refer to
    `XMonad.Layout.Circle` and `XMonad.Layout.ThreeColumns` for
    alternatives.

  * Deprecated the `XMonad.Layout.StateFull` module and
    `XMonad.Layout.TrackFloating.(t|T)rackFloating` in favour of
    `XMonad.Layout.FocusTracking`.

  * `XMonad.Util.ExclusiveScratchpads` and `XMonad.Util.Scratchpad`

    - Deprecated these modules in favour of `XMonad.Util.NamedScratchpad`.

  * `XMonad.Actions.CycleWorkspaceByScreen`

    - The type of `repeatableAction` has changed, and it's deprecated in favour of `X.A.Repeatable.repeatable`.

  * `XMonad.Hooks.DynamicProperty`

    - Deprecated the module in favour of the more aptly named `XMonad.Hooks.OnPropertyChange`.

  * `XMonad.Actions.Navigation2D`

    - Removed deprecated function `hybridNavigation`.

  * `XMonad.Layout.Spacing`

    - Removed deprecated functions `SpacingWithEdge`, `SmartSpacing`,
      `SmartSpacingWithEdge`, `ModifySpacing`, `setSpacing`, and
      `incSpacing`.

  * `XMonad.Actions.MessageFeedback`

    - Removed deprecated functions `send`, `sendSM`, `sendSM_`,
      `tryInOrder`, `tryInOrder_`, `tryMessage`, and `tryMessage_`.

  * `XMonad.Prompt.Window`

    - Removed deprecated functions `windowPromptGoto`,
      `windowPromptBring`, and `windowPromptBringCopy`.

  * `XMonad.Hooks.ICCCMFocus`

    - Removed deprecated module; this was merged into core.

  * `XMonad.Layout.LayoutBuilderP`

    - Removed deprecated module; use `XMonad.Layout.LayoutBuilder` instead.

  * `XMonad.Hooks.RestoreMinimized`

    - Removed deprecated module; use `XMonad.Hooks.Minimize` instead.

  * `XMonad.Layout.Named`

    - Deprecated the entire module, use `XMonad.Layout.Renamed`
      (which newly provides `named` for convenience) instead.

  * `XMonad.Actions.SinkAll`

    - Deprecated the entire module, use `XMonad.Actions.WithAll` instead.

  * `XMonad.Layout.Circle`:

    - Deprecated the entire module, use the `circle` function from `XMonad.Layout.CircleEx` instead.

  * `XMonad.Hooks.EwmhDesktops`

    - `_NET_CLIENT_LIST_STACKING` puts windows in the current workspace at the
      top in bottom-to-top order, followed by visible workspaces, followed by
      invisible workspaces.  Within visible and invisible groups, workspaces are
      ordered lexicographically, as before.  Currently focused window will
      always be the topmost, meaning the last in the list.

  * Deprecated `XMonad.Util.Ungrab`; it was moved to `XMonad.Operations` in core.

### Selected Features and improvements

  * `XMonad.Layout.CenterMainFluid`

    - A three column layout with the main column in the center and two stack
      column surrounding it. The master window will be on the center column and
      spaces on the sides are reserved.

  * `XMonad.Layout.FocusTracking`.

    - Replaces `X.L.StateFull` and half of `X.L.TrackFloating`.

  * `XMonad.Actions.MostRecentlyUsed`

    - Tab through windows by recency of use. Based on the Alt+Tab behaviour
      common outside of xmonad.

  * `XMonad.Actions.ToggleFullFloat`:

    - Fullscreen (float) a window while remembering its original state.
      There's both an action to be bound to a key, and hooks that plug into
      `XMonad.Hooks.EwmhDesktops`.

  * `XMonad.Layout.CircleEx`:

    - A new window layout, similar to `XMonad.Layout.Circle`,
      but with more possibilities for customisation.

  * `XMonad.Util.NamedScratchpad`

    - Added `nsSingleScratchpadPerWorkspace`—a logHook to allow only one
      active scratchpad per workspace.

  * `XMonad.Util.EZConfig`

    - Added `remapKeysP`, which remaps keybindings from one binding to another.

  * `XMonad.Util.NamedScratchpad`

    - Added `addExclusives`, `resetFocusedNSP`, `setNoexclusive`,
      `resizeNoexclusive`, and `floatMoveNoexclusive` in order to augment
      named scratchpads with the exclusive scratchpad functionality of
      `XMonad.Util.ExclusiveScratchpads`.

  * `XMonad.Layout.BorderResize`

    - Added `borderResizeNear` as a variant of `borderResize` that can
      control how many pixels near a border resizing still works.

  * `XMonad.Util.Run`

    - Added `findFile`, `list`, and `saveExcursion` to the list of Emacs commands.

    - Added `toList` to easily lift a `String` to an `X Input`.

    - Added `>&&>` and `>||>` to glue together different inputs.

  * `XMonad.Actions.Navigation2D`

    - Added `sideNavigation` as a fallback to the default tiling strategy,
      in case `lineNavigation` can't find a window.  This benefits
      especially users who use `XMonad.Layout.Spacing`.

  * `XMonad.Prompt.OrgMode`

    - Added `orgPromptRefile` and `orgPromptRefileTo` for interactive
      and targeted refiling of the entered note into some existing tree
      of headings, respectively.

    - Allowed the time specification in `HHMM` format.

  * `XMonad.Actions.Search`

    - Added `aur`, `flora`, `ncatlab`, `protondb`, `rosettacode`, `sourcehut`,
      `steam`, `voidpgks_x86_64`, `voidpgks_x86_64_musl`, `arXiv`,
      `clojureDocs`, `cratesIo`, `rustStd`, `noogle`, `nixos`, `homeManager`,
      and `zbmath` search engines.

  * `XMonad.Layout.ResizableThreeColumns`

    - Fixed an issue where the bottom right window would not respond to
      `MirrorShrink` and `MirrorExpand` messages.

  * `XMonad.Hooks.EwmhDesktops`

    - Added `disableEwmhManageDesktopViewport` to avoid setting the
      `_NET_DESKTOP_VIEWPORT` property, as it can lead to issues with
      some status bars (see this
      [polybar issue](https://github.com/polybar/polybar/issues/2603)).

    - Added `setEwmhFullscreenHooks` to override the default fullfloat/sink
      behaviour of `_NET_WM_STATE_FULLSCREEN` requests. See also
      `XMonad.Actions.ToggleFullFloat` for a float-restoring implementation of
      fullscreening.

    - Added `ewmhDesktops(Maybe)ManageHook` that places windows in their
      preferred workspaces. This is useful when restoring a browser session
      after a restart.

  * `XMonad.Hooks.StatusBar`

    - Added `startAllStatusBars` to start the configured status bars.

  * `XMonad.Prompt`

    - The `emacsLikeXPKeymap` and `vimLikeXPKeymap` keymaps now treat
      `C-m` the same as `Return`; the latter keymap now also accepts the
      prompt upon pressing enter in normal mode.

    - Added `prevCompletionKey` to `XPConfig`, facilitating the ability
      to cycle through the completions backwards. This is bound to
      `S-<TAB>` by default.

  * `XMonad.Actions.Prefix`

    - Added `orIfPrefixed`, a combinator to decide upon an action based
      on whether any prefix argument was given.

  * `XMonad.Prompt.Pass`

    - Added `passOTPTypePrompt` to type out one-time-passwords via `xdotool`.
